---
title: Clustering with Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA)
categories: [Lab2, teaching]
tags: [LDA, clustering, dimensionality reduction, SVD, unsupervised learning]
math: true
---

## Why PCA is not sufficient?
Since PCA is an unsupervised learning technique, the lack of informations due to the fact that it is not using the associated label reduce its ability on observing clusters. Consequently it can be defined Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), a supervised version of PCA, whose ability on generating clusters is way higher.

## Setup for LDA implementation
The main difference between PCA and LDA is that in the latter we center the dataset by shifting each column by the centroid of each class, instead of using a global centroid for the data. Unfortunately, this slight modification will make the algorithm way more technical than before. For simplicity, assume we have a dataset 

$$
    X = [x^1 x^2 \dots x^N] \in \mathbb{R}^{d \times N}
$$

and an associated label vector

$$
    Y = [y^1 y^2 \dots y^N]
$$ 

such that $$y^i$$ represents the correct class of $$ x^i $$. Assume that in our problem there are $$K$$ classes $$C_1, \dots, C_K$$ and define $$I_k = [i_1, \dots, i_{N_k}]$$ as the vector of the indices corresponding to the columns of $X$ associated with the class $$k$$ ($$N_k$$ is the number of elements lying in the class $k$). Clearly, it holds that $N_1 + N_2 + \dots + N_K = N$. To simplify the discussion, assume that our dataset is ordered as 

$$
    X = [X_1 X_2 \dots X_K]
$$

where $$X_k$$ contains each datapoint such that the corresponding class is $$k$$. Now, for each class $$k = 1, \dots, K$$ define the class centroid

$$
    c_k(X) = \frac{1}{N_k} \sum_{i \in I_k} x^i
$$

and the global centroid

$$
    c(X) = \frac{1}{N} \sum_{i=1}^N x^i
$$

We can now define the main tools for our algorithm: the **within-clusters** and **between-clusters** scatter matrices.

### Within-clusters Scatter Matrix

For any $$k = 1, \dots, K$$, define the centered matrix for each class

$$
    X_{k, c} = X_k - c_k(X_k)
$$

and, by concatenating $$X_{k, c}$$ for any $$k$$, we get

$$
    X_w = [X_{1, c} X_{2, c} \dots X_{K, c}]
$$

From $$X_w$$, we can define the **within-cluster scatter matrix** 

$$
    S_w = X_w X_w^T
$$

representing the _correlation matrix_ for points inside of each cluster.

### Between-clusters Scatter Matrix

Not, define

$$
\bar{X}_k = [c_k c_k c_k \dots c_k] \in \mathbb{R}^{d \times N} 
$$ 

$$
\bar{X} = [\bar{X}_1 \bar{X}_2 \dots \bar{X}_K]
$$

and its centered version

$$
\bar{X}_c = \bar{X} - c(X)
$$

Finally, the **between clusters scattering matrix** is

$$
S_b = \bar{X}_c \bar{X}_c^T
$$

This concludes the setup part.

## Idea
Given the quantities defined above, the idea of LDA is to build a projector $Q \in \mathbb{R}^{d \times k}$ such that the within-clusters distance of the projected data is as small as possible, while the between-clusters distance of the projected data is as big as possible. If $k \in \mathbb{N}$, $k < d$, is the dimension of the projected space and $Q = [q_1 q_2 \dots q_k]$ is the projector, we want $q_j$s to be orthogonormal vectors that maximize the function

$$
    H(q) = \frac{q^T S_w q}{q^T S_b q}
$$

Since for any $\alpha > 0$, $H(\alpha q) = H(q)$, it can be proved that maximizing $H(q)$ is equivalent to find the solution of the constraint minimization problem

$$
    \max_{q} q^T S_w q \qquad \text{s.t.} \> q^T S_b q = 1
$$

Which can be easily solved by the following procedure. First of all, observe that $$S_w$$ is symmetrical, since $$S_w^T = (X_w X_w^T)^T = X_w X_w^T = S_w$$. If $$S_w$$ is also positive definite, it is known that it is possible to compute its Cholesky decomposition as

$$
    S_w = L^T L
$$

where $$L \in \mathbb{R}^{d \times d}$$ is a lower-triangular matrix.

If $$S_w$$ is not positive definite, we can make it positive definite by doing &nbsp;

$$
    S_w = S_w + \epsilon I
$$

where $\epsilon \approx 10^{-6}$ is a small value. A matrix like that will always be positive definite.

Now, given a number $$k$$ (representing the dimension on which we want to project), compute the matrix $$W \in \mathbb{R}^{d \times k}$$, whose column are the first $k$ eigenvectors of $$L^{-T}S_bL^T$$.

Finally, if

$$
    Q = L^{-1} W
$$

then $$Q^T \in \mathbb{R}^{k \times d}$$ will be the projection matrix of LDA. 

## Implementation
The implementation simply follows what we just described.

* Given the input data $$X$$ and the labels $$Y$$;
* Compute $$S_w$$ and $$S_b$$ as described above;
* If possible, compute the Cholesky decomposition of $$S_w = L^T L$$, if not, compute the Cholesky decomposition of $$S_w + \epsilon I = L^T L$$;
* Find the first $$k$$ eigenvectors of $$L^{-T}S_bL^T$$ and collect them in a matrix $$W$$;
* Compute $$Q = L^{-1} W$$ and $$Q^T$$.
* Since $$Q^T$$ is the projection matrix, we can project $$X$$ into $$Z$$ as $$Z = Q^T X$$.